Hey, everybody.
Welcome to "Mind Shift."
This is a new talk show that
asks questions about what's
happening on Earth and why.
And today, we're
going to be exploring
the psychic experience
and shamanism.
This has obviously been a
major part of my past work.
For my first book,
"Breaking Open the Head,"
I visited tribal people in
Africa, Mexico, and the Amazon,
where we explored visionary
plant substances like iboga,
mushrooms, and ayahuasca.
Since that book came
out over 10 years ago,
the popular interest
in shamanic practices
and psychedelic plants has
flourished and blossomed.
There's also been a resurrection
of scientific research
of the medical value of
psychedelic substances.
Together, we're going
to take a little dive
into contemporary shamanism.
We're going to explore
the evolving interest
in visionary plant
medicines and also discuss
the kinds of journeys people
have with these substances,
which can be amazingly
transformative or sometimes
woefully ineffective.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
Hey, everybody.
Welcome to "Time Drift"--
I mean "Mind Shift."
I'm your host, Daniel Pinchbeck.
Today, our first guest is the
extraordinary musician Ben Lee.
He's made an amazing
new album, "Welcome
to the Work," about his
ayahuasca experiences.
So we're going to be discussing
shamanism, visionary culture,
whatever else comes to mind.
So I'm so happy
you could join us.
Thank you.
NARRATOR: Born on
September 11, 1978,
Ben Lee is an award-winning
Australian musician and actor.
Not only does Ben have
an obsession for music,
he is also extremely passionate
about esoteric science,
the workings of the
human mind and spirit.
In 2003, after meeting a
spiritually enlightened
Indian avatar, he
was inspired to make
his notable album "Ayahuasca."
Called his most
experimental work,
this album marries his music
with his spiritual beliefs
and practices.
In 2013, Lee was a
mentor on the hit
Australian TV show "The Voice."
He has also won many
ARIA Music Awards
for his song "Catch My
Disease" and the album
"Awake is the New Sleep."
[APPLAUSE]
Ben, thank you so
much for joining us.
I hope you like our little
mini media empire here.
I love it.
It's very professional.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Nice, nice.
So I yeah, talk
about your new album
and what kind of
led you to make it.
Yeah, I make this
record, "Ayahuasca,
Welcome to the Work."
And it was somewhat
of a scary journey,
both conceptually and
creatively, in that obviously
there are consequences to
coming out of the closet,
not just in relationship
to ayahuasca or ceremonial
medicines, but just in terms
of prioritizing consciousness
and the awakening of
consciousness as such
a dominant passion in my work
and my life, in that it does
sort of put you a little
bit on the fringe of what,
as someone who-- I always wanted
to be Michael Jackson or Elvis
or Kurt Cobain or
something, like, you know,
a mainstream rock star.
And that didn't really happen.
But it's still a leap
for me to think, wow,
I'm really speaking
about stuff that
is a really fringe interest.
But it's been really satisfying
to-- you know, while it is
definitely the record that's
probably sold the least
amount of copies of any
of my albums so far,
it has really connected with
people that understand what
it's about and understand why
an experience like the ayahuasca
journey would be as provocative
as was that I'd want to sort
of make art in tribute to it.
Is was a big-- yeah,
it's a big journey.
When you say consequences, the
main one you're talking about
is being a little bit
kind of marginalized
or not being as kind of
central to the mainstream
culture's concerns?
Yeah, I think it's
like it's marginalized.
And I think a lot
of-- when you start
dealing with consciousness,
like the fear
that comes up for me is, oh,
people are gonna hate it.
But the reality is, people
are just gonna ignore it.
You know what I mean?
Why do you say consciousness
instead of a term
like spirituality or something?
What do you mean in that
context by "consciousness?"
Yeah, for me consciousness just
means awareness, an awareness
of the truth.
And I think no matter
where you look,
whether it's in terms of
the state of the environment
or the economy or politics or,
in a larger cosmic sense, what
is our relationship to a greater
meaning or understanding,
we clearly are not as aware as
we could be of our potential
and are not living a life
that probably is as, you know,
as healing or as
generous or as nurturing
as we're capable of doing.
So for me, I like the
word "consciousness,"
because it just applies
becoming conscious.
It doesn't say that
necessarily, this
is what you'll find when you
become conscious, that you'll
meet Jesus or Buddha.
It just-- to become conscious
is just to become aware.
So let's talk a little
bit about ayahuasca.
For people who don't
know about it so much,
how would you describe it
to somebody who's new to it
or just learning about it?
Yeah, well,
ayahuasca is a tool.
It's a technique.
And we're very
lucky in the world
to have so many beautiful
techniques, especially
the ancient ones that
have been handed down,
whether it's breath or
meditation or mantra
or some of these
ceremonial medicines.
They all do similar
things or are
capable of doing
similar things, and that
is take us into amplified
states of consciousness.
And I prefer the term
"amplified states"
rather than "altered states,"
because the great techniques,
like ayahuasca, they utilize
the neurochemical DMT, which
is already active
in the human mind.
What's DMT?
DMT is this, you know,
dimethyltryptamine.
The theory is that
it's what's released
by the pineal gland that
gives us these elevated states
of insight.
So for me, I like the
term "amplified states
of consciousness," because the
same reason meditation-- it's
not showing you something
completely other than what
we ordinarily experience.
It's just exaggerating
it so that we perhaps
get a more acute
sense of what is
occurring in our inner world.
And how did you first come
to have that experience?
I first was
introduced to ayahuasca
through a friend
of mine, who really
just-- it was because I saw
some real changes in his life.
I've always had the-- I've
been very open to trying
different things, but I've had
a pretty strict criteria of what
would take in that I need to
see real changes in someone
becoming happier and
healthier and more integrated
as the kind of, you know--
in terms of what's vouching
for that particular modality.
And in this particular
friend, I saw
he'd sort of stopped
drinking and stopped smoking
pot and stopped womanizing.
His priority-- he had sort of
started thinking about giving
back to his community.
I was like, hey, something
real is going on here.
So that was what first
drew me into participating.
Beyond that particular friend,
now that you've been involved
with it for a while, have
you found that a lot,
that people have
lifestyle changes
that seem to occur
when they have
these types of experiences?
Yeah, I mean, it
seems absolutely
that at least in the short
term, ayahuasca opens people
up to thinking about
the world in a more
interconnected manner.
I am a firm believer in a
daily spiritual practice,
as I am in traditional
psychotherapy.
And I think-- I think
ayahuasca combined
with some of these other things
is actually the most effective.
Because what you sometimes
find is that it gives people
such peak experiences,
but they don't really
have any tools to integrate it.
And they also don't
have the skills
to interpret the experience.
Because all mystical experience
going back to the Old Testament
and, you know, they all
required interpretation.
None of them were just
simply God saying, well,
this is how it is,
do this, do that.
Anyone that takes that
literally, I think,
is really missing the hidden
teachings in the religions.
So for me--
When you do
ayahuasca, you usually
do it with a guide or a
shaman or somebody who helps
create that interpretation.
Yeah, well that's true, but
that only often addresses
the immediate 24 hours
or the period where
someone's sitting in ceremony.
For me, the first
ceremony I sat,
it really took me probably
two years of interpretation
and wrestling with
and meditation
to get some hint of what had
happened to me that evening.
It was that overpowering.
And it was that--
it was literally,
like I felt that I just
saw the tip of the iceberg
of the unconscious mind.
And it was still much more
than I'd ever imagined
was inside me.
So I think it's
important to approach all
of these techniques with
a really healthy respect
and a humility and not think
they're things that we can just
either use as a
quick fix, you know,
a pill that will give us
immediate enlightenment
or solve all our
problems, but also
that we should really contain
within a safe structure.
And it sounds like the
shaman that you sort of
worked with has really
provided like a whole kind
of set of ideas and techniques.
I mean, it's almost more like a
school or a learning experience
than just like these ceremonies
that are disconnected.
Yeah, well it's
really interesting
that in the modern
world, we've sort
of thrown the baby
out with the bathwater
in terms of tradition.
And there are all these great
postmodern ideas that we create
our own reality and we
can pick and choose,
but some of what we miss is the
surrender that these systems
provide us with.
And the shaman who
I've worked with
is very much into integrating
the ayahuasca experience
into a larger concept
of traditional Buddhism
and esoteric science
and gnosticism
and understanding that a lot
of these ancient traditions
have a lot to teach us
about what we can and can't
trust in our own mind.
And I think ayahuasca's
really interesting because it
kind of dumps you
into your imagination
and into your own mind.
But one of the things
that I think people learn
after a lot of work
with the medicine
is that not everything
you see can be trusted.
And in the beginning, everyone's
like, I got the guidance!
I'm going to go
start this business
and become a millionaire.
And then they do it,
and they're like,
huh, why didn't that work?
Because there perhaps isn't the
questioning or the vigilance
against our own mind
and our own ego that
some of these older
systems provide
us with tools to work with.
I mean, one thing
that's often very
important about these
types of ceremonies
is the music or the
sound component.
I was wondering how you
related to that as a musician,
if it's impacted how you
think about music and so on.
I'd say ayahuasca
completely revolutionized
the way I think about music.
I guess just in
the power of beauty
in music, in that I
came up through punk
rock and underground
music, and a lot of it
is very referential and ironic
and cynical and playful.
And those can all be
great qualities in art.
But for me, with the music that
has been really transcendent
in ceremony is music that's just
beautiful and really glorifies
the human spirit
and the human psyche
and what we're capable of.
So it kind of set a
whole new bar for me
to attempt to stumble towards.
Because I'm still working with
sort of the rudimentary tools
of my underground punk rock
training but trying to bring
it-- edge it towards
this other goal.
There's often something
kind of unusual
about the music in ceremony.
I mean, it's not
like typical harmonic
Western harmonics, right?
It has like a different kind
of a tonal structure almost,
you know?
Yeah, well I think
sacred music throughout
many different cultures
has often had a almost
counterintuitive feel to it.
It's not designed to necessarily
be pleasing in the way
that we're used to a
pop song being pleasing.
Like a pop song-- and
I studied pop songs
and wanted to write hits
and all that for years.
You don't want to
write hits anymore?
Well, look, I'm
open to it, just
in case whatever the spirits of
pop song, of one-hit-wonderness
are listening.
I'm open to it, but
it's not the craft.
I was obsessed with
the craft, you know?
And it's designed
to work in the way
that a great commercial
works, you know?
It's a marketing tool in that
it's got to hook you in really
quickly, it's got to provide
you with some immediate
gratification, and
then at the same time,
hopefully it plants a seed of
like real human tenderness.
But sacred music does
something totally different,
which I feel is it--
it reconnects us
with God in whatever
sense that we find that.
And--
Would the Ben Lee of 10 years
ago have been kind of shocked
and horrified to hear you
make that statement now?
Or is it a straight continuity?
Yeah, it's really funny,
because I've gone through a lot
of phases with spirituality.
And sometimes I've been
very guarded with it.
But I think in general
with my career,
I've always taken the
perspective of just
having my heart on my sleeve.
So whether that was
falling in love with a girl
or meeting a guru in India or
getting heartbroken or wanting
to be ambitious,
like I just wrote
about what I was
passionate about,
And I think that side has been
a real through-line in my career
and hasn't really changed.
Have you ever fallen in
love with an ambitious guru
in India?
-Huh.
Huh.
That's a good one.
Well, that's the
next concept album.
Who was your guru in India?
Well, yeah, [INAUDIBLE]
is a teacher who I've
been seeing for about 10 years.
And I actually just got
back from taking my wife
and my two daughters, my
daughter and stepdaughter,
for the first time as a family.
And that's been an
incredible experience.
Yeah, interestingly,
that experience
when I met-- you
know, often you have
these ideals about
the spiritual path,
and when I met
[INAUDIBLE], I thought,
oh, this is like-- I've got to
renounce all my worldly goals
and everything.
And one of the first
things Amma said to me was,
has Ben Lee ever been top ten?
And I said, no, Amma.
And it was just funny hearing
this like young Indian man
in rural India talking about
commercial success in that way.
And Amma said, put Amma's
message into music,
and Amma will bless
Ben to be top 10.
And I said, what's the message?
And Amma said joy.
And I then wrote six or seven
songs in the next few weeks
and made this record called
"Awake is the new Sleep" that
debuted at number seven
in the Australian charts,
went up to number
two, when Top 10
in the Netherlands and Spain.
Anyway, I say all
this because there's
a continuum of this whole
journey for me, which
is understanding that the
science or the patterns
that we encounter in our
careers, in our relationship,
in our spiritual life,
they're not the ones
that are on the surface.
And some of these
great teachers-- and I
would include ayahuasca in
that as a great teacher--
they give you a little hint
of the gears that are going
behind the screen or
behind the surface
that are actually causing
life to happen as we see it.
Nice.
Yeah, I guess having-- I
mean, I wrote in my book
"Breaking Open
The Head" in 2002.
I guess I started
taking ayahuasca
in '99 or '98 or something.
And it's been interesting
seeing it over the years.
Like at first, nobody seemed
to know about it for the most
part, and now it's like a
vine that's moving quickly,
like snaking its way through
all these different aspects
of our culture and into
even very elite sectors.
But are you seeing that also?
Are you seeing more and
more people finding it?
It's almost-- in a way, it's
almost like a trend in the way
maybe yoga was in like the late
'70s or something, you know,
or '80s.
-I know, yeah.
It's a mixture of being sort
of-- I feel a warmth about that
because the most
optimistic side of me
hopes that people will
experience the highest
experience that's
possible in the sense
of a real opening of the
heart and a realignment
of priorities.
But I also have a healthy
skepticism about it, I suppose,
in that I know that the tool
itself, while it's powerful,
it's equally powerful because
of what it's contained in.
And if it loses touch
with the real goal, which
is the enlightenment of the
human mind and the human heat,
then it's in danger of becoming
corrupted and just becoming
another way for
people to get kicks
and to sort of escape
from their daily life.
So I'm cautious, you know?
I'm optimistic, but I'm cautious
about what it all means.
And I think as a matter of
fact, your particular shaman
had said something to that
effect, right, that in a sense,
it was possible that ayahuasca
was only going to be valuable
for 30 years or something,
because eventually
it would get corrupted by the
modern world. is that right?
Well, I think it's
just based on the idea
that essentially, never
underestimate the human being's
ability to corrupt anything.
We've basically been able to
find all of these pure tools
and pure stories and
pure states and degrade
them in various ways.
So there is a pattern there
that we have to be aware of.
Yeah.
On the other hand,
if you look at them,
and I guess I've always
felt and kind of reflected
this idea in my
books, that if we look
at the ecological crisis
and it's kind of, you know,
ever-growing kind of onslaught,
we need some type of medicine
to shift our psyche.
And ayahuasca-- and many
people, and how you feel,
talk about it as maybe
like the spirit of nature
or like the voice of
the mother, in a way.
Like if it's not ayahuasca,
I don't really see what
it's going to be at this point.
Yeah.
I share your hope about that.
You know, I really hope
that's how it plays out.
I guess this is where
the implementation
of the experience becomes
important, because we have
these strong internal
experiences with the medicine
or with meditation, and if we
then-- if we then basically
release ourselves of the
responsibility that comes
with that type of insight,
I don't think the world
will really transform.
Because as far as I see
it, and I think the way
I see it is not that
radical in terms
of the history of
spirituality, that the reason
for the destruction
in the environment
is there is a reason.
And it's an inner reason.
It's our own greed.
It's our own desires.
It's our own lust for power
and our lust for material--
you know, material objects.
And all that really
just being based,
according to a different
mystical traditions,
on our ignorance, right?
Exactly, but that we have
to first and foremost tackle
those things within ourself.
And I am wary of people coming
back from mystical experiences
as like crusaders for good!
And the problems
are all out there.
Whereas if there's one thing
that the ayahuasca has shown me
it's that the problem's in here.
I have all those things that
I'm seeing out in the world.
I am afflicted by
those desires and those
corruptions the same
as the guy who's
bulldozing down the Amazon.
And so the point
of spirituality,
as far as I can
see, is to tackle
those things within myself.
OK, I can hear that, but
I can also-- would also
argue that unfortunately, you
also see people getting kind
of in this endless
loop of inner healing
that just becomes kind
of like in a sense
another kind of
solipsism or narcissism.
So like if we're never going
to attain some perfect state
of health-- maybe that
doesn't even really exist--
then when do we know
that we're healed
enough that we can crusade or--
I agree with you, and I
think there is a difference
between using spiritual
tools for healing and using
them for enlightenment.
I think healing is the
loop people get stuck in.
Healing happens automatically
on the spiritual path.
As we try and-- you know, if we
keep our mind on-- and again,
some people are more comfortable
than other with the word God.
I've always been
comfortable with it.
I don't-- I feel
like it's more been
corrupted through use of like
evangelicals and literalists,
but I--
What does it mean
to you exactly?
Well, to me it's the
great order of the thing
that we're in.
I don't know what it is,
but it's like it's not me.
I'm not the boss of it.
There's something else
out there that's--
But there is a boss.
Well, a boss or a trend.
Let's call it a trend, you know?
There are trends that
are not in my control.
And I call that God.
But the point is that
I've always seen that--
What happens if you
piss the boss off?
Well, I think we-- I think we
have been pissing the boss off.
And I think that's clearly
like part of the reason
why-- I don't know.
I feel myself, when I get out of
alignment, say with my career,
when I get too prideful or too
making it all about my ego,
I'm in for a humbling.
It's happened time and
time again in my career.
I think it was
Yogananda who said
that life was a continual
choice between humility
or humiliation.
-Yeah, exactly.
And that's that other--
and Chogyam Trungpa
said meditation is just
one insult after another.
-Yeah.
-So it's the same thing.
It's that like basically if we
pull ourselves out of alignment
individually or
collectively, we're
in for a karmic punishing.
And so I think like the goal
of this kind of work-- yeah,
healing is important,
but I think
to actually allow the greater
system to work through
us should be our real goal.
Nice.
So it's been awesome
to talk to you.
We're going to
take a little pause
and stow you away
in a safe place
and bring on Ross Brockley,
talk to him for a bit,
and then you'll be back on and
we'll have a little dialogue.
[APPLAUSE]
NARRATOR: Ross Brockley is
a comedian and vegetable
farmer from Nebraska.
He has opened for many notable
comics, such as Louis CK,
and has appeared in
feature films as well.
His most recent film, "Sick
Birds Die Easy," directed
by Nick Fackler,
chronicles the adventures
of a group of
artists and misfits
to a tiny village
in Gabon, Africa.
There, they experience
the psychedelic properties
of the iboga plant, which
is native to Western Central
Africa and has been used in
Bwiti religious ceremonies
for thousands of years.
[APPLAUSE]
Ross, great to meet you.
Thanks so much for coming.
Thank you for having me.
And so you are the featured
star in this new art film,
"Sick Birds Die Easy."
-That's right.
Which is set in
the wilds of Gabon
on a hunt for the
sacred iboga plant.
Yup.
Cool.
So tell me a little bit about
the film and your role in it.
Uh, OK.
My friend Nick lives in Omaha.
I live in Lincoln, Nebraska.
And he called me up and
said he wants to go to Gabon
and take iboga and
make a movie about it.
So he had kind of a
loose script and I said
sure, and, uh, off we went.
In the film, you're
depicted as a drug
fiend, diligent pot dealer, who
has many forms of addictions.
But in reality, you're
actually a farmer.
Yeah.
And based on a true story.
Cool.
And so were you excited?
Had you wanted to try
iboga for a long time?
I never heard of it.
I'd tried ayahuasca once,
and I'd never heard of iboga.
So I started reading about it.
Yeah, I was up for it for sure.
-Cool.
How was your
ayahuasca experience?
-Total dud.
-Dud?
-Yeah.
-OK.
And, um--
[LAUGHTER]
That's a shame.
So what emerged in the film
was-- so when I saw the film,
actually, I hadn't really paid
that close attention to like
the liner notes or whatever.
I assumed it was
essentially a documentary.
And then when we
met today, it turns
out that it's actually more of
a kind of a fictional construct.
Yeah.
I mean, there's parts
of it-- it's true.
We did go over there, and I
did go through the ceremony
and things like
that, but, uh, no, we
were just kind of making
a film, just a narrative
comedy or whatever.
-I see, OK.
And yeah, so for you,
doing the iboga over there
and the ceremony, it
wasn't like a real--
you weren't really like
going for it in a sense for--
No, I was definitely
going for it, yeah.
But how was that experience
for you in reality,
then, the iboga?
It was just another bust.
I'm 0 for 2.
[LAUGHTER]
I'm really sorry to hear that.
I hope at some point we can
like pop your shamanic cherry
with like some--
Yeah, I don't-- I don't get
on with shamans very well.
Really?
[LAUGHTER]
They always end up hating me.
What is it about you
that drives them so mad?
I don't know.
You'd have to ask them.
[LAUGHTER]
-All right.
So, well, how was
it to be in Gabon?
Oh, that was great.
It's a rainforest
meets the ocean,
and, uh, it's beautiful,
really good, really fun.
And yeah, in the film, you
guys go on like this long trek
through the jungle.
You get hopelessly lost.
There's like a death.
But all of that was just
filmed nearby your hotel.
-Right.
-Right, cool.
And there was a kind
of Hunter S. Thompson
vibe of like dereliction
and decadence
and kind of like degeneracy.
Yeah, there is.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Nice, nice.
But some of that
was true, you know?
It wasn't all faked.
Yeah.
And so yeah, so maybe
tell me a little bit more
about-- so iboga
didn't work for you.
-No.
-Ayahuasca didn't work for you.
Have you smoked DMT?
Yeah.
That worked.
Nice.
[LAUGHTER]
ROSS BROCKLEY: No, that's good.
What did that do for you?
That just-- I took
a bong hit of it,
and my whole body
filled up immediately.
I just had to hit the deck.
And I couldn't even
finish the hit.
And maybe 10 minutes of
just kind of psychedelia.
Psychedelia.
ROSS BROCKLEY: Yeah.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Nice.
Right on.
Cool.
ROSS BROCKLEY: It was great.
Awesome.
And yeah, so like, well,
tell me a little bit more
about your experience
doing the film.
I mean, so the character
you were playing
was like a you but a not you?
Yeah, it was kind of
based on me, I guess.
But he told me to-- I'm a drug
addict, is what the idea was.
And I was being cured
of my drug addiction.
And the drug we chose
that was my drug of choice
was OxyContin.
And I don't really know how
to play an OxyContin head.
I was just taking naps a lot.
And they showed me taking a
nap and go, because of the Oxy,
Ross was always taking a nap,
you know, in the narration.
But um, I've never
done OxyContin,
so I really don't know what
that's all about, but, um.
-Awesome.
-Is it?
Sure.
Oh, I don't know-- OxyContin?
Yeah.
I think I tried it once
and it wasn't awesome.
OK.
It was, you know, it definitely
make you feel medicated.
Yeah, Big Pharma.
-Yeah.
And this film is now garnering
prizes left and right,
I understand.
-Yeah.
He worked on it for two years,
and we had a couple rough cuts.
And, uh, worst movie
I've ever seen at first,
and then he kept going,
and he refined it.
And then he must have just
kind of figured it out.
And then it won the Poland
International Film Festival
grand prize or whatever.
And and then now it's premiering
at Woodstock next week
or two weeks or
something like that.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Right on.
Cool. yeah, I had a sense
that-- well, I mean, so for Nick
and for other people
involved in the film, I mean,
there was an
interest in shamanism
and these kind of ancient
traditions and so on.
Yeah, there was, but,
um-- yeah, there was, sure.
Yeah?
What's the but?
Uh, no, I'm not-- nothing.
[LAUGHTER]
So just a minute
ago we had Ben Lee
up here talking about
like kind of spirituality
and ceremony and ritual.
And what do you think
about all that stuff?
I mean, where do you stand
on this whole God question?
Oh, I'm a farmer.
I live with God every day.
Birds and bees and butterflies--
I can see it every day,
and I'm in tune with it.
Right on.
Awesome.
Yeah.
And you got other
plans, movies,
other dramatic escapades?
Um, "Sick Birds Die
Easier" with Russell Brand.
But I didn't get
to meet him, so I
don't know if we're gonna
be able to pull that off,
but yeah.
What would be the theme there?
How would that-- what was
the narrative structure?
Probably ayahuasca,
I guess, you know?
Sure.
Try that, and go over there
with, uh, and try that one.
Yeah, well, he really
wants to try it,
he says, but he just can't.
Oh, really?
Yeah, because he's in AA.
Oh, that doesn't matter.
-No?
-Does it?
[LAUGHTER]
I mean, they have
an abstinent policy.
And in fact, I know
a number of people
who are in AA who are really
dying to try ayahuasca
and other shamanic medicines,
but it's a total violation
of the principles.
Oh, like the 13--
he's a 13-stepper?
I think-- is it 13?
It's a number of steps.
OK.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He's got steps.
-OK.
-Yeah.
Um, cool, and so tell me a
little bit about the French guy
who was in the film.
Uh, yeah, he-- Tatyo.
So is he actually like
what he's portrayed?
Yeah, very much so.
So he's a shaman there in
[INAUDIBLE], they're called?
Yeah.
And he-- he was great.
He welcomed us and was
very hospitable at first.
And then I'd read
about this Bwiti faith
that they have in Africa,
and that's kind of based--
Yeah, I actually went through
an iboga initiation myself.
OK.
And it's the Bwitis, right?
They have a religion
based on this plant.
And I read a book about
it before we left,
and then I knew that Bwiti was--
they'd always said that Bwiti
encourages you to completely
speak your mind wherever
you-- whenever you want.
And that's kind of how I
approached my interactions
with these people.
And I think I might
have overdone it.
And then eventually he
started to kind of dislike me.
How do you know?
I just know, you know.
You know. [LAUGHS] And
so I was the only one
that did the ceremony.
What's that?
From the film, it looked
like he had a whole community
of Europeans who'd
been like addicts who
were now living
with him and doing
the Bwiti ceremonies and so on.
Right.
When you spoke your
mind and kind of
pissed him off or
alienated him, like what
were you talking about?
Oh, you know, 9/11 or whatever,
just politics, probably.
And--
-Oh, right.
Now that I remember,
in the film you
have a whole conspiracy-minded
kind of thing.
Like you like to talk--
-Who doesn't?
[LAUGHTER]
Secret government and 9/11
and financial shenanigans,
all that stuff.
-Yeah.
So that's true to life.
-Israel.
-Right on.
-Yeah.
-Cool.
[LAUGHTER]
So you must feel comfortable
right here down near Ground
Zero doing this show.
I mean, maybe not
perfectly, but, uh, sure.
Right on.
Well, what do you think is
happening on the world stage,
then, in terms of
the city government
and the Illuminati
and all that stuff?
I don't go for the
Illuminati thing too much.
OK.
I think we're just over
there fighting Israel's wars.
I think they're-- I
think they're urging
us to kill all their enemies.
I see.
So you were talking about this
kind of stuff with the French--
Yeah, and he's a Jewish guy,
and I wanted to say, you know,
it's not-- I'm not talking
about Jewish people.
I'm talking about
the state of Israel.
And, uh, he just-- he
just wasn't going for it.
And so he didn't give
me the good stuff.
That's what I'm trying to say.
[LAUGHTER]
Was the actual
idea of the film is
you were supposed to have this
cathartic, transformational
experience at the end?
I'm not sure that
was even scripted.
But the idea was we were
gonna see what happens,
and we were gonna
try-- I was gonna do it
and that would
have been, I guess,
the documentary part about
what really did happen there.
I wasn't planning on faking
anything with the initiation.
But gave you like--
you think he gave
you like the unleaded iboga.
I think so, yeah.
I know so.
[LAUGHTER]
He gave me the bark.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
Well, it is bark.
That's what it is.
-Yeah, I know.
The iboga part's
the center core.
Oh.
So you just sat
there sick on bark?
I just sat there kind
of faking it, you know,
and laying there for three
hours and just-- you know,
and then I figured it out.
-So no visions?
-No-- zip.
No spirits of your ancestors?
-Nothing, nothing, nothing.
-No.
No.
All right, well,
I'm, you know, sorry.
It was disappointing.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Yeah.
Yeah.
Because I would love to do it.
I'll maybe try it again
someday if we get over there.
Right on.
Well, awesome.
It's a little disappointing
as a conversation stopper.
-Yeah.
-But, uh.
[LAUGHTER]
Let's have a little discussion
with some other filmmakers
and Ben Lee, and we'll
see where it goes.
-OK.
-Yeah, yeah. yeah.
So we'll be right
back with Ben Lee.
And also we're bringing
Stuart Braunstein on,
who's a producer of "Don
Peyote," another film
much like "Sick Birds Die
Easy," which combines kind
of shamanic experience into a
kind of improvisational comedy
structure.
So we'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
MAN: He is the king of
the world in right action.
And she is the moon among the
sacred alphabets of compassion.
They treasured their
secrets like pierced rubies
but found little peace.
[APPLAUSE]
So here we are back with
the cast of Beatlemania.
It's great to see you guys.
[LAUGHTER]
Stuart, you wanna
maybe talk a little bit
about your shamanism work?
Well, actually, it
all happened at once
because-- sort of because
of you in a weird way.
So, you know,
basically I met Daniel,
and this is at a
time when I was-- I
had this building called
Collective Hardware.
And it was an insane asylum,
but a beautiful insane asylum.
It had galleries and
post-production facilities,
and it was just like this
culture in New York City.
And, uh, I met him,
and he's like, oh,
you gotta check out this
shaman stuff, you know?
And he started getting in my
year about all this stuff.
And I was like, ah,
it's hippie stuff.
I'm not interested.
I was too busy doing a
lot of cocaine back then,
so I wasn't that interested
in anything psychedelic
at that moment, you know?
But it just-- he kept on
talking to me about it,
and I started liking
the ideas about it.
Then I started watching
documentaries about it.
And it was like, wow, this is
quite interesting, you know?
I mean, because to be
honest, I love drugs, always.
I love drugs.
And I was always looking to
get an out-of-body experience.
I just was using the wrong ones.
And, uh--
It was kind of funny, actually,
when I saw "Sick Birds"
and Ross' character--
It reminds you of me? [LAUGHS]
I kind of like thought
about you a little bit,
because he was
like a drug-loving,
kind of post Hunter
S. Thompson-ish,
you know, slightly tragic
figure, who, um, you know,
was seeking redemption
through some type
of shamanic excursion, you know?
Yeah, I mean, it was all--
you know, it was all fun,
man, and I don't regret any of
it, but um, all of a sudden,
then you introduced
me to the medicine.
And I took this medicine,
and I was like, whoa!
I'm like, wow.
I really resonated
with the idea.
with this world.
It really, really showed me
the other dimension in such a
really clear, beautiful way.
And I felt like I was at home.
And then--
So let's just hold
up for a little bit.
I was gonna ask-- I
was gonna ask Ben.
I mean, when you heard
Ross' story, what would
be kind of your advice to him?
I mean, he had two misses
on this shamanic path here,
you know?
Well, I mean, I don't
know about iboga.
With ayahuasca, it's
not for everybody.
I mean, I think
there's a-- I think
it's a mistake with
any spiritual modality
to think that everybody
should be doing the same thing
and using the same tools.
And that may have
very well just been
bumping into something that was
not meant to be in his journey.
So I don't really have any
particular advice about it.
But it's just-- it's nice-- it's
always affirming for me to hear
stories like that to reinforce
the idea that there are many,
many parts.
And I found that very
beautiful what you were saying
about farming and your
connection to nature and stuff
and just realizing it's
not all about these
like heightened psychedelic
moments of-- there
are epiphanies in our work life.
There are epiphanies in
our connection to nature.
So I think it's
just all different.
Different people
have different paths.
Right.
But I think Stuart's experience
really kind of mirrors some
of the stuff you were saying.
Because I've seen him now really
go through major life changes
by following a path of
working with these different
shamanic lines and medicines.
I mean, you want
to talk about how
your life has kind of shifted?
-Yeah, I mean, it's funny.
What you said is
correct, you know?
Because I've been meeting a
lot of people from my past
recently, you know?
I feel like there was a big
shift over the summer, just
a real world shift,
definitely in New York City,
with people that
I've run into that I
haven't seen in a long time
and that I used to party with.
And some of them
are just meditating
and really having
the same experiences
I have with the medicine.
So I agree-- I
agree 100% that, you
know, you resonate
with what you resonate.
You try few different things.
I have a friend who's a
strict Buddhist, you know,
and he does medicine.
He doesn't really
get it, you know?
But he does strict
Buddhist practice,
and he's totally on a path.
And I think it's just about
finding something you resonate
with and then to ground
you through this kind
of like threshold moment
that we're going through
of this transition, you know?
Ross, what do you think?
I mean, do you feel like
still called or compelled
by this particular idea?
Or are you just happy to
be back in your own realm?
What idea?
Of like working with these
different shamanic traditions.
Oh, I love mushrooms
and stuff, you know?
So I wanted-- i definitely
was-- I ate as much as I could,
you know?
[LAUGHTER]
And do you guys all think that
like psychedelics are kind of
making a resurgence
in the culture
right now somehow in maybe a
more positive way than they
have for a number of decades?
Well, there's
differently a legitimizing
in a more responsible model
coming through that, say, there
were so many amazing steps in
the '60s taken and the '70s,
but it also left a
very bad taste in sort
of mainstream society's mouth.
And now there's a lot of-- like
I was saying with my record,
I was very cautious about
how would this be received,
and I actually found quite
a lot of mainstream media--
even when I
anticipated, ohm this
is going to be a hatchet
job, they were actually
quite receptive to the ideas.
And so it's a really-- it
is a really interesting
dynamic period we're in.
I also think it's
how you do them, too.
I think, uh, you know,
like to do these ceremonies
and to work with people that
understand the traditions
of some of these
ceremonies, and, you know,
because that's what
you take with you.
So if you're sitting and you're
doing-- like if you're doing
like grandfather
medicine, peyote,
and you're purifying a fire,
and you're taking care of fire,
and there's like
rules of how to deal
and you're paying
homage to things,
then you take that out
into your life with you.
I find myself not
really thinking about it
while I'm in these ceremonies,
but when I come out,
like living that path.
So it like becomes a
practice, and it becomes-- it
feeds into your everyday life.
And I think that's sort
of a big part of it.
So I think like just
taking psychedelics
just to take
psychedelics is maybe
a little bit risky,
because you can do
down different portholes and--
So is a part of what you've
been gaining from doing
the more ceremonial
work is like learning
how to sort of take care
and handle things properly?
Yeah, it's about
living with compassion,
respect, accountability
for your actions,
intention, and forgiveness.
And you know, it
works, you know?
I mean, a lot of the ways I used
to live, someone did me wrong,
I'd go get a bat, you know?
And now it's like I
just-- I pray for them.
It's kind of amazing,
like even just
hearing what you're
just saying now,
he could be talking about AA.
Yeah.
You know, I mean,
we are talking
about a basic
spiritual truth of,
this is what the
path looks like.
STUART BRAUNSTEIN:
And AA is a path, too.
It's about getting yourself
together and becoming an adult
and becoming a responsible
member of our planet.
And then what?
No, just kidding.
And your community and
just doing you best.
You know, the funny
thing is, I tried AA,
but I didn't really
resonate with it.
I actually did not get into
medicine to give up drugs.
I was trying to trick it, to
be honest, in the beginning.
I was trying both ends of it.
And you know, there's
this grandmother
medicine, the ayahuasca
medicine, is like grandmother.
Because she's like, eat your
broccoli, ear your broccoli.
Otherwise I'm gonna
pester you, you know?
So after a while, it shows
you the enlightenment
and then takes it away and
beats you up until you change.
The grandfather is like he gives
you a cigar-- it's the peyote--
and then teaches you how to
live and tells you a story,
you know?
So I've gotten like to
understand these medicines
and how to use them and then
to, you know, actually do them.
It makes you live properly.
It's not just about a
psychedelic experience.
It's about how you live
your life, essentially.
And in terms of like
the sort of tradition
you've been working with, which
I think you described it almost
like a mystery school,
like what are some
of the more like subtle
lessons that have been
unfolding for you over time?
The biggest lesson has
been about the vigilance
with which I should
attend to my own mind,
meaning just
question everything.
Like we tend to-- I can
only speak for myself,
but I tended to have a very
black-and-white idea about when
I was kind of acting egoically
and when I was acting
in a pure manner and
just realizing like,
it is way more
complicated than that.
There are-- some of the
purest intentions are sort of
contaminated with selfishness.
But if we are really
talking about how to serve
and how to not just
think about ourselves,
it is incredibly
subtle, you know.
The ego is cunning baffling.
And it's very subtle,
the ways that it
infects our ability to serve
and think in a bigger picture.
So it's just been about
that, about vigilance,
about realizing like, wow,
how much attention to detail
can I give in the
integrity of my actions
and my thoughts and my words?
Can you give us any
like kind of examples,
like a practical example?
-Yeah, I can.
A practical example was
actually to do with this album,
that at the same time
this album came out,
I was a mentor on that show
"The Voice" in Australia.
And, um--
-What's that show?
It's a reality singing show.
They have one here
with, you know,
Adam Levine and Christina
Aguilera, big thing.
Anyway, I got off into
do it in Australia.
I thought, this is
great, because I've
made this album that is not
going to get on the radio.
This is a great opportunity
for me to get my music across
or my face or
whatever makes people
think about buying your record.
So I did this thing.
And I started to do
a lot of interviews
around this, because
it was a very
mainstream-- a very mainstream
event, you know, a media event.
And what I caught myself
doing was kind of thumbing
my nose at the institution that
gave me the job on "The Voice"
and being like-- like saying
things in interviews that
were very bratty, like, see?
This is kind of like Rupert
Murdoch publicizing ayahuasca,
and stuff like that.
Because he was--
because, you know,
inadvertently it was giving
my album a lot of publicity.
And I came away with quite
a sick feeling from some
of this press I was doing.
And I realized that
if I'm actually
trying to serve the
message of the medicine
that I've received,
it's not about appearing
superior or appearing
smarter than the mainstream.
And I'd fallen back into
a very old archetypal
and an old paradigm of
the punk rock thing of,
hey, let me show
you how smart I am,
and I'm more cynical and
smarter than the mainstream.
And just realized I need
to grow up past that.
I've been given this very
mainstream opportunity.
I should honor that and not
rock the boat unnecessarily.
And I should hold this work and
this music, this sacred music,
with complete
integrity and care.
Yeah, don't insult the muggles.
[LAUGHTER]
But you know what I'm saying.
It's like in the
end, I was going
to shoot myself in the foot
and lose the whole thing.
So it was kind of just-- I
don't know if that illustrated
the point, but the point is
that like to really analyze
my actions and my
motivations and not just
fall into old
patterns and behaviors
that felt comfortable.
I was gonna ask you
two guys-- so the films
that you did, "Don Peyote"
and "Sick Birds Die Easy"
are kind of similar kind of
a format, I guess in a way,
sort of somewhere in
between documentary--
I guess the term is mumblecore.
ROSS BROCKLEY: Oh, really?
Never heard that one.
You wanna explain what that is
and see if that's basically--
STUART BRAUNSTEIN: Yeah,
well, mumblecore is basically
you write out scenes,
and, you know,
you give the actors the
scenes, and you shoot it
until you get a
good scene out of it
and let them just
improv dialogue.
Is that kind of what you
guys were doing on your set?
Yeah.
There wasn't much script at all.
[LAUGHTER]
We were like walking
through the jungle,
and, uh, the other character
Sam and I created this sort
of animosity with each
other that we were
stealing each other's drugs.
And so we hated each other.
And we would-- so
a lot of the movie
is us just kind of
almost fighting.
So the director, Nik
Fackler, was kind of
just open to what
kind happened and what
dynamics kind of emerged?
Yeah, yeah.
He would just tell us where
to go and maybe tell which--
somebody to break down
or-- it's, um, yeah,
very loose, very mumblecore.
-Nice.
[LAUGHTER]
So I was gonna ask
you guys-- you've
been doing a lot of this
ceremonial work over time,
like each of you.
What's like the most
extraordinary single experience
that you've ever
had in a ceremony?
I mean, you know what's
really funny for me right now?
It's sweat lodges.
-No, I said single experience.
-Single?
You mean like an
actual experience?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, you mean like
sitting in the seat of God
and moving energies in the
middle of the jungle, something
like that?
Yeah, something
like that, yeah?
Yeah, well, that's it.
[LAUGHTER]
I mean, I went down to Peru
and-- you know, the funny thing
is that there's a lot
of different shamans
that have darker energy
and lighter energy,
but I was pretty much
open to anything.
And I ended up
going down to Peru,
and I knew this guy had a
little bit of a darker side.
Well, this was this
shaman who later
got implicated in a death.
STUART BRAUNSTEIN: In a death.
Mancoluto.
Yes, that actually--
at Chimbre.
Which was a shame, because the
guy Rob who built that place--
Well, just to give
people the backstory,
we had a friend who
was a Wall Street guy,
and he found this shaman in Peru
and became very enamored of him
and felt that was like
the one great shaman.
So he invested in this
guy, building kind
of like an empire with a sort of
temple structure in the middle.
And then it turned out that
the guy was kind of a dark--
STUART BRAUNSTEIN: Sorcerer.
Sorcerer.
And it ended up that somebody,
a young guy from the US
was down there doing
a ceremony and somehow
died during the ceremony.
We don't really know why,
because instead of immediately
go into the police or
whatever, they actually
tried to destroy the body, which
led to a lot of-- which I think
Mancoluto was in
prison for a while,
and the whole thing
kind of fell apart.
And it's actually been one of
the few cases that's really
sort of cast a kind of negative
kind of spell over ayahuasca,
which has generally--
there hasn't
really been any kind
of negative health
implications or anything.
I mean, it seems
like ayahuasca's kind
of like weathered that
storm, but Stuart went down
and worked with
that shaman a year
or two before that happened.
Yeah.
I mean, I knew there was
something up with the guy.
I mean, I'm a New Yorker.
I can tell when someone's
kind of, you know, shady.
You know, he wasn't even
drinking his own medicine.
I just don't like drink with
someone who's not drinking
what they're serving me, but--
And instead of staying up
all right with everybody,
he would send people into
the jungle by themselves.
In the jungle by
themselves, which I thought
was kind of cool, actually.
But, um, you know--
[LAUGHTER]
I kind of-- what
happened was is it was
like four or five ceremonies.
So I drank ayahuasca the
first night, and whenever.
I saw the visuals.
I went down there because I
wanted like some sort of-- I
wanted to-- you
know, I'm very like,
ah, like I think everything's
bullshit, you know?
That's been mainly my thing.
I've been an atheist
my whole life.
I didn't even believe in God.
So I went down.
And I'm like, I've
got to see this.
I want to see what this--
I want to be shown this,
a reality here that
I can understand,
that I can believe in this.
Because I was just
getting into it.
And so the first time, I saw
the cool like very obvious
stuff, pyramids and dragons.
And you know, I'm like, all
right, that's hallucination.
Then I did San Pedro.
And that was great.
That's like a shot of adrenaline
in the neck, you know?
It's like you turn into a wolf.
It was amazing. you
know, get your mojo back.
And then the next night, he
wanted to serve me San Pedro
again, but I wanted ayahuasca.
So I told him no, and
everyone was like,
you said no to this guy?
You're not supposed to.
And I'm like, no, I want that.
I know what I want, you know?
So he sit me back.
He said, OK, and then
passes me by when
he was serving the medicine.
Anyway, so he came back to
me, gave me the medicine,
I go into the tent.
And I'm just sitting there.
I'm waiting and waiting.
OK, what's gonna happen?
All of a sudden-- boom--
my chest opens up.
Blood starts squirting out.
A rattle comes out of
my neck, starts shaking.
I vibrate.
-In a vision, not in reality.
In a vision, yeah.
But I vibrate into
a billion pieces
and then snap back
together again.
And there was no
sound in the jungle,
just like little like boops.
I walk outside.
I sit on the deck
out of the tent.
And literally I'm sitting
there pushing the jungle,
and it's like waving.
And there was like no
sounds, no bugs, no air.
And you know, the jungle's loud.
So that was a pretty
big indication to me
that this was
something different,
you know, and something I
needed to experience more of.
So that was definitely the
beginning of my journey.
Where I am now with it is a
whole other another story.
I mean, it's a practice now.
Well, let's go back.
I wanted to hear his most
extraordinary single incident.
I mean, the one
that comes to mind
is very simple in that I had one
ceremony that I just struggled
the whole-- you know, it
was a matter of hours,
but it felt like
lifetimes, just struggle,
deep, deep, painful struggle.
And when it was
finally relieved,
it was actually during
Occupy Wall Street.
I'd been down, and I
saw-- it had sort of gone
against my expectations in
that I thought it was all
like young, sort of pseudo
anarchists and stuff,
but there were
nurses and teachers.
And I felt this overwhelming
sense of compassion
for all-- everybody's
struggle, how
everyone I encounter and
everyone I see is struggling.
And I'm still-- I feel
emotional remembering it,
because it was the first
time I can honestly
say I felt real compassion
and that I said,
wow, that struggle I just
felt, we're all doing that.
And that's something I've
tried to carry with me
and just tried to
stay in touch with.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Hm.
-And then I saw a dragon.
-[LAUGHS]
-[INAUDIBLE]
-What's that?
You don't wanna hear mine.
No, what' yours?
No, I don't have one.
That sounds awesome.
[LAUGHTER]
DANIEL PINCHBECK: We're
gonna have to send
you back to shaman school.
ROSS BROCKLEY: That's right.
Remedial classes.
What I realize now
is that sweat lodges
are really an amazing thing.
That's more what I
believe in these days.
Because you can
go to these sweat
lodges, and you do a prayer
in there, and you come out.
You're cleaned, and it's
not like a big processing
thing and something that you
can balance yourself with,
you know?
What do you guys think the
impact of this type of work
is going to be culturally?
We're already seeing it kind
of more and more permeating
the culture in all
these different forms
and different major figures.
I mean, are there like
kind of cultural figures
that you wish would
have these experiences
or political figures?
And where do you think we'll
be with it in like 5, 10 years?
I think it's tough,
because it's a lot of work.
And I think that, really,
you get stuff out of this
if you do the work.
And just to do one experience
with this medicine or a couple
experiences and not
really understand what it
and unless you're trying
to connect to something,
I think it's a longer process.
I don't think it's the silver
bullet, for sure, you know?
I think that, um,
it's a long way to go.
I'm hoping.
I think it worked for me,
so if it worked for me,
I'm sure it's worked
for many other people.
It got me into a nice place.
Do you wish that friends
that you used to hang out with
would have these experiences?
Or do you think they're
not really ready for them
at this point?
-You know, it's funny.
Three years ago or four
years ago when I started,
I was telling people, and
people thought I was crazy.
Now I'm running into people all
the time saying, I tried it.
You were right.
So it is really-- it's
permeating a lot of cultures.
But it's not just the medicine.
It's also meditation and
yoga and eating well.
-Yeah.
-Juicing.
I mean, everyone
I know now seems
to be on a path like that.
It's amazing. i used to
know people that were
just drinking and doing drugs.
Now I know all people that are
drinking cold-pressed juices
and eating vegan food, you know?
And having a good time with it.
You used to scoff at me
when I didn't eat some kind
of throbbing piece of meat.
-I know.
I was like, I don't
wanna eat that food!
So go ahead.
What do you--
I just think-- I obviously
don't know what the future
holds, but I think one
of the great lessons
we can take from
Buddhism and Hinduism
and Eastern thought
is the lesson of karma
and that we are creating
the future today.
And it just-- the more of
us that, like you said,
whether it's through medicine or
through other conscious paths,
choose to start taking baby
steps of more integrity
and more compassion
towards each other,
we are creating a better future.
And so I just choose to
stay optimistic about
that more people will
be attracted to that.
I see that happening
in a big way, actually.
I think it really is happening.
It's probably hard to
notice, but it's happening.
Cool.
Well, listen, thank you guys
so much for joining us today
on "Mind Shift" or "Brain
Drain" or "Time Drift"
or whatever the heck it is.
[LAUGHTER]
And I hope to have you
back in the future.
Thanks, man.
Ben, great to see you, Stuart.
Ross, thanks for your
contributions there.
Oh, thank you very much.
And thank you all so much
for being with us today.
Thanks so much.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]